## Notes

| Transcription Date | Last Updated | By          |
| ------------------ | ------------ | ----------- |
| 07-Dec-2023        | 07-Dec-2023 | Darren Chung |

---

FR. MADIGAN, M.S.C., of Rabaul, tells the story of PAUL AH LOK, a Chinese Convert, remarkable for both his faith and piety, who died on the Feast of the Conversion of his namesake—St. Paul.

In the early days of colonisation in what is now termed the Mandated Territory of New Guinea there was a great lack of skilled labour. The natives were passing through the taming period, and European artisans were difficult to obtain and retain. Obviously, then, the Government was faced with the necessity of inviting Asiatic artisans to fill the gap in the development of the infant colony. Many Chinese, after a period of indentured service, were asked to remain, and were even invited to bring their families to settle in the colony. To-day the children of those early settlers are a numerous community, and not a few of them have accumulated considerable wealth.

For many years after the Catholic Mission had made considerable progress the Church could not claim even one of the numerous Chinese. Friendly and affable towards the missionary, yet with no desire to examine the claims of Christianity, the Chinese increased and set up little stores in numerous native villages. Now all is happily changed. The Catholic Chinese are a numerous community, and the future for the Faith is particularly bright. Paul Ah Lok, whose death we all lament, was "The Father of the Chinese Catholics in the Islands."

Arriving in New Guinea early in 1890, Ah Lok was for a time employed by a fellow countryman, and with the permission of the Administration acquired and planted up an area of land. Succeeding beyond expectation, Ah Lok soon brought his mother and other members of his family to settle on his holding. Then a difficulty arose. Ah Lok's brother, eighteen years younger, was in need of education, and could not, of course, attend the small village schools of the natives. Hearing that a half-caste school had been opened at Vunapope, the headquarters of the Catholic Mission, about 190 miles away from his little property, Ah Lok set out one morning with his young brother for Vunapope. As the school curriculum was in the German language, Ah Lok enquired if his young brother could be taught English as well, because it was good for business. Sister Borgia, a Queensland Nun and a recent arrival in the Mission, undertook to teach the young Ah Kun. Asked by the Sister if he had any objection to his young brother receiving instruction in the Catholic religion, Ah Lok remarked: "Make what you like with him, as long as you learn him good and give him plenty of stick." He did learn good and to-day is the most prosperous merchant and planter in the islands.

AH LOK returned to his plantation, around which other Chinese plantations had sprung up, with Ah Lok as the friend and adviser of all. In one of his periodical visits to his brother at Vunapope, Ah Lok remained for Benediction, and he solemnly declared he had a vision of the Person of Our Lord while the Monstrance was raised on the altar. Whether true or imaginative, the event made a deep impression on Ah Lok. He sought instruction, and though his baptism was delayed for some time because of lack of sufficient instruction, he pleaded again and again to be baptised. Eventually he was baptised on the 12th April, 1907.

Rarely in life does one meet such an ardent, zealous and generous convert. When he became better instructed, Ah Lok procured Catechisms and Catholic literature from China, and gathering round him a number of his countrymen every evening, he soon had a class ready for baptism. Later Ah Lok came to settle in Rabaul with his brother. The first Holy Mass in Rabaul was in Ah Lok's house. Afterwards a piece of land was set aside for a Church-School, and Ah Lok, with his family, were generous benefactors towards the erection of the building, which served as a Church and School for six years. In 1925 a community of Sisters from Kensington, Sydney, opened the Yang Ching School, and now the num- ber of children has reached the 130 mark, although many are still pagan.

In every good work for religion and charity Ah Lok was always prominent. He was a devoted friend of the late Archbishop Couppe, whom he frequently entertained at his plantation home. It was a home where every passing missionary was at all times welcome. Nor was Ah Lok's charity and generosity confined to the Islands. Many French Bishops in China continuously appealed to their Chinese friends in the islands. On one occasion when it was thought that two Catholic colleges in China would have to close because of lack of funds, Ah Lok, with his brothers, saved this threatening calamity. He assisted the education of many poor children, not only in Rabaul, but also in China. During the last years of his life, Ah Lok had the consolation of seeing three members of his brother's family embrace the religious life. Two of his nephews are students for the priesthood in China and his niece is a Nun. What struck one in contact with this remarkable convert was his spirit of faith and his resigned way of seeing the finger of God in all, even the distressing events of life. If God so acts or permits such things to hap- pen, we should never complain.

After 49 years spent in the islands, Ah Lok became ill. An operation was necessary and for a few days seemed to be successful, but the long life in the tropics left him with little strength to recover. Daily he received Holy Communion, and faced death with resignation and great confidence. Though with few educational opportunities in early life, he realised that he had a work in life and he did it. He died confident that his efforts had pleased his Lord and Master. Paul Ah Lok died on the feast of the con- version of his namesake, St. Paul. The large and representative funeral was an eloquent proof of the respect in which he was held and the sorrow felt at his passing. May he rest in peace.
