## Notes

| Transcription Date | Last Updated | By          |
| ------------------ | ------------ | ----------- |
| 07-Dec-2023        | 07-Dec-2023 | Darren Chung |

---

## The Sacred Heart Parish Rabaul

In 1924 Reverend Father Madigan M.S.C. was entrusted with the care of the Rabaul Parish. He was very concerned that there was no Cathollc School for the fast increasing Catholic Chinese Population.

Mr. Paul Alok (brother of Mr. Akun) was a fervent Catholic. He had been favoured with supernatural graces and like his patron St. Paul, his zeal for the spread of the Catholic Faith knew no bounds. He Himself instructed many Chinese, had them baptised and constantly watched over them to prevent lapses. Nearly all the grandfathers of today's Chinese Catholic families were instructed by Mr. Alok.

Father Madigan, Mr. Gabriel Chow Ying, Mr. Alok and Mr. Akun had many conferences about a School - a Catholic School. They were militant Catholics, and knew that a thorough Catholic education was the only thing that would stand by their young Catholic families. They were the first School Committee and the first Parish Council of Rabaul ... After much deliberation it was decide to open the first School for Chinese under the auspices of the Church. Father Madigan arranged with Bishop Vesters for Australian Sisters - the Daughters of Our Lady of the Sacred Heart to come from Sydney to take over the English section of the school and two Chinese teachers were brought from Canton to teach Chinese.

The first Chinese School was situated in Casuarina Avenue, near Malaguna Road, on the spot now occupied by Mr. Gabriel Sing Yip's store. It was a two-storeyed building, with one large room upstairs and one downstairs. Their were rooms at the back to accommodate the teachers.

The large room downstairs was also the Parish Church until 1928. The Blessed Sacrament was reserved there, but the Sanctuary was Partitioned off, and the partition opened only for Holy Mass.

On the 25th January, 1925 the school was opened by Bishop Vesters amid great rejoicing and Jubilation by the Chinese. It was named St. Teresa's Yang Ching school. The initial enrolment was 90. The English staff consisted of Sr. M. Gonsaga and Sr. M. Adela. The Chinese teachers were Mr. Andrew Wong and Mr..... Sr. M. Brogia replaced Sr. M. Gonsaga whose health gave way, and she had to return to Australia.

Among the pupils enrolled on that first day were Mr. Achai's two sons, Luke and Gabriel, both now Priests in China, and both in Communists prisons. Also Mr. Achai's daughter now Mother Elizabeth, Helper of the Holy Souls - also in the hands of the Communists.

Other names on the opening day register were Mr. Gabriel Chow Ying's sons: Gabriel, John, Simon and Phillip (R.I.P.) and his eldest daughter Teresa, now Mrs. Laurie Chan. Lawrence was also enrolled that day; Mr. Akun's sons: Bernard, Stephen and Ludwig and his daughter Maria Rosa and Eileen (R.I.P.); Mr. Choi Tan's sons Alois and his daughter Lucia and Francesca and Angela; Gerard Foo Nam and his Sister Winifrid; Mrs. Choi Wong's children Xavier, Maria and Rosa; Mrs. Ah Lam's son and daughter August and Rosa.

In 1928 a fine big church was erected in Malaguna Road, on the site of the present church. (here as previously at the church-school in Chinatown) the whole school assembled at 6.30 daily for Holy Mass and _ in Chinese. Then all race back to Chinatown swallowed a hasty breakfast and presented themselves at St. Teresa's Yang Ching school punctually at 8'Oclock. Mass in those days, the good old days, was considered by these deeply religious Chinese as part of the daily curriculum - nothing could go well if Holy Mass did not begin the day even if it meant a race with time to be on the mat at 8 p.m. when the bells rang.

St. Teresa's Yang Ching school always admitted the Phillipinos, Malays and Euranasians, which the Methodist Chinese school did not, although all the Malays were Methodists. There was no administration school for these people at this time. The chinese were the first to start schools "Akun's School" being the first. Mr. Alois Akun brought a teacher from China to commence this. Another was started by M.I.C.Wee for the Methodists. Mr. Akun's school developed into the St. Teresa's Yang Ching School and the T.C. Wee school was taken over by the Overseas Methodist Mission.

In 1927 the passports for the two Chinese teachers expired and they returned to China. Bishop Vesters obtained on loan from the bishop of Canton, a Chinese priest, Rev. Father Lau. For five years Fr. Lau exercised his priestly ministry in Rabaul, and also taught Chinese in the school. Father Lau instructed and baptised many converts in Rabaul and worked zealously among his country men until recalled by his Bishop in 1933. Then followed a succession of Chinese teachers who mostly remained on only a short time until the arrival in 1937 of Mr. Chan and Mr. Yim. These two fine teachers stayed for a longer period, Mr. Chan till the war Mr. Yim till 1941. There were also changes among the Sisters and names well known to the Chinese were Sr. M. Marcella, Sr. M. Felicitas, Sr. M. Pidelma Sr. M. Michael, Sr. M. Immaculata, Sr. M. Philomena and Sr. M. Editha.

Great work as accomplished in St. Teresa's School. Besides turning out good practical Catholics and clever business men and women, the yearly concerts and handcraft displays were something to be proud of.

As the Catholic population increased the Church was enlarged and beautified. Father Madigan had just completed the building of the lovely Church, when he was recalled in 1939. Brother Overkamping put all the finishing touches to this lovely building just before Rev. Father Barrow took over. The Church was large - The altar was like a jewel set in the lovely sanctuary, at the back of which a glorious stained glass window depicting the Creation, the Redemption and the last judgement. On eighter side were side altars with lovely life size statues of the Sacred Heart and Our Lady of the Sacred Heart. There were two shrines, one for St. Joseph and one for the little flower. The altar fails were made of very highly polished timber and Brother had very artistically decorated the table top of the Altar rails with crushed and polished pumice stone - it gave the effect of a pink marble, The pews were also made in Vunapope - They were beautifully finished, each having religious symbols carved into the ends. The columns down the centre aisle which were just ordinary 4" x 4" joined together were covered in such a way to make them look like something out of one of the cathedrals in Europe. The Church pre-ware was something to be proud of. At the front entrance there was a drive in and five or six concrete steps, the whole Length of the front portion of the Church led up to the two big double doors.

A very big statue of the Sacred Heart with arms extended, stood in the garden facing the entrance.

In 1937 when disaster fell on Rabaul, this beautiful Church was the refuge for thousands of Natives, who wondered what was going to happen to them. Though a lot of damage was done at this time, the church was not destroyed and after the volcano settled down everybody returned to Rabaul and things went on as usual.

In 1939 the school enrolment had outgrown the school in Chinatown and another beautiful commodius new school was built on Kombiu Avenue - It was a two-storeyed building with 8 large airy classrooms, an office, rooms for the Chinese Teachers and a capacious verandah that ran the whole length of the building. The entrance opened into a large assembly hall, which was also used as a recreation hall, concert hall, and display room for the beautiful arts and crafts that were done through the year. The quadrangle in front of the school had been cemented and a very nice basketball court had been set up. School assemblies were also held here. Sr. M. Editha, Sr. M. Michael Sr. M. Felicitas and Sr. M. Fidelma were teaching in this new school with Mr. Chan and Mr. Low.

This new school kept the title of St. Teresa's Yang Ching School. Bishop Vesters always took a keen interest in this school. He looked upon St. Teresa's as his special protégé. He never failed to preside at the annual Break-up Concert, though he always delegated the actual Prize prize-giving to some local celebrity: General Wisdom, Governor Grifith, Chief Justice Wanliss or Judge Phillips, all of whom presented the prizes on different occasions. After the departure of Bishop Vesters, his successor Bishop Scharmach took an equally keen interest in the school, and presided at the blessing an opening of the beautiful new school on Kombin Avenue.

Father Barrow was not satisfied with completing this beautiful new school for the Chinese children. He also erected a fine new building, where the present Sacred Heart School stands - It was St. Joseph's School for the Malay children. Sr. M. Immaculate and Sr. M. Berenice started this school, but it was not functioning long when World War II broke out.

Then followed total destruction - at least of all the material work in Rabaul. The faith of the Catholics of Rabaul was not destroyed and with the return of the Australians to the Territory in 1945 everyone got to work to build up what had been ruthlessly laid waste. Under the zealous direction of Rev. Father Ormonde, the Chinese Catholics began to set their parish in order again! The Chinese had been gathered together in Kokopo, and a school had been opened there- Sr. M. Michael, Sr. M. Adela, Sr. M. Immaculate choosing to postpone their trip to Australia, in order to get the children back into school. These three Sisters, after their trying years in the camp, straightaway took up school duties and carried on until the first batch of Sisters returned from their holidays to relieve them.

In the meantime, with the fine old Catholics who had battled to build the first Yang Ching School, Father Ormonde was battling again to get another school under way, and by 1947 all the Chinese Children were again in the Rabaul Catholic School - now the Sacred Heart School. The buildings were only made of scrap timber and black iron, and the desks were rough planks - but it was a beginnings, and they would not rest till improvements were made. Holy Mass was offered every morning in the poor little church with the dirt floor - and everyone was there. The Catholics of Rabaul had not given up the wonderful and fruitful practice of morning Holy Mass. Gradually with the generous co-operation of the Chinese Catholics things began to take shape. Mr. Ludwig Seeto built the Convent for the Sisters, and they again took up residence in Rabaul. A new Church - with concrete floor and iron roofing was soon standing, and gradually the children were removed from the buildings on Matupit Farm, to the Church - School in Malaguna Road. History repeats itself, and the Sacred Heart School, as did St. Teresa's was starting out again as a Church School. But Father Ormonde pushed ahead and it was not long before a line of buildings was standing facing Malagina Road. These building were to house the classes from St. 11 up, and the Kindergarten would remain at Matupit farm. Sr. M. Editha, Sr. M. Michael and Sr. M. Athanasius were teaching in the Sacred Heart school and Sr. M. Joannita took charge of the Kindergarten.
