## Notes

| Transcription Date | Last Updated | By          |
| ------------------ | ------------ | ----------- |
| 11-Dec-2023        | 11-Dec-2023 | Darren Chung |

- [Link to original source](https://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/article/118082530#).

## The Opening of New Catholic Church in Rabaul

#### Picturesque Ceremonies in Far Off New Guinea

After years of patient waiting and a growing anxiety at seeing an increasing congregation Sunday after Sunday unable to be accommodated, Rabaul, the first and principal port or settlement in the Pacific Islands, has its own Catholic Church.

Unlike the native village, where Catholicity came to a settled and pagan people and gradually displaced paganism, in Rabaul the present large congregation grew around established Catholicity. Rabaul as a settlement is of recent growth. Many years ago what is now a pretty and growing centre was nothing but a marshy swamp, the long and undisputed abode of millions of mosquitoes, and as no native in beginning married life had any inclination to have these buzzing creatures for neighbours, not a single native hut was within miles of Rabaul. However, Rabaul had geographically real advantages, at least from the white man's outlook. It was sheltered at the foot of a semi-circular mountain and the harbour was deep and safe for shipping.

Once decided to form a settlement, transformation was thorough and rapid. The swamps were drained and filled and soon after the sheds of commerce began to appear. A large number of natives drawn from the different villages carried out, under the direction of white government officials, all manual work, while artisan occupations had to be entrusted to Asiatics-Chinese, Japanese. Guams, and Malays. The result was that in a short time a large and cosmopolitan population settled in what is now known as Rabaul.

#### The Beginning of the Church

In a native village the beginning of the Church is usually very humble, a bamboo frame covered with long grass is the first home of Our Sacramental Lord. In Rabaul the beginning was even more lowly. Holy Mass was for months celebrated in a grass hut at the rear of a Chinese store; it was almost suffocating on a particularly hot day. Later on as the congregation increased a zealous Chinese Catholic – a recent convert – gave the use of a dingy hall crammed in between other wooden buildings. Although unsuitable it was gladly availed of on account of the extra accommodation. For over six years this hall supplied both church and school in what is termed "Chinatown." The native population pouring into Rabaul from the villages increased almost daily, while a number of Chinese embraced the Faith and, with their children, helped to swell the congregation.

For a long time past accommodation was wholly inadequate and it was really painful to see so many poor natives trying to hear Holy Mass while standing outside in the tropical sun after having walked long distances. Now all, or nearly all, the worries and anxieties of the past are at an end. On Sunday, 8th April, the congregation heard Holy Mass for the last time in "Chinatown." A week later the solemn blessing and opening of the new church – St. Francis Xavier's – was performed by his Lordship Dr. Vesters, Vicar-Apostolic of Rabaul. It was indeed a day of great rejoicing not only for Rabaul but for the whole Mission and everything, including delightful weather, seemed to combine to make the event a truly memorable one. Probably in the history of the Islands such a large crowd of natives had never before assembled in Rabaul.

#### The Blessing and Opening

The solemn blessing and opening was fixed to take place at 8 o'clock and to be followed by solemn High Mass. His Lordship Dr. Vesters, accompanied Rev. Father Mertens (Superior) came from Vunapope, the headquarters of the Mission, about 20 miles distance, and also a specially trained choir of native girls under the direction of the Sisters of Our lady of the Sacred Heart. The celebrant of the High Mass was Rev. Father Baumann, a missionary of nearly 30 years standing, and formerly missionary of Rabaul and Matupit Island.

After the blessing of first outside and afterwards inside of the Church, Solemn High Mass began, and rarely did a Catholic function seem so Catholic. Besides natives from fully forty different tribes the congregation included Chinese, Japanese, Malays. Guams, Fillipinos, half-castes and whites – planters and government officials – many of whom had journeyed long distances in order to be present.

The choir of native girls, so carefully trained by the Sisters, was heard to perfection. It was fitting that the beautiful voices of the innocent native children should be the first to welcome our Sacramental Lord in His new home in their native country. At the Offertory Mrs. L. Smith, a Melbourne soprano, sweetly rendered Gounod's "Ave Maria," her powerful voice being heard to perfection in the spacious building.

There were two sermons – one for the Cosmopolitan section of the congregation in English and a short address in the native language. Taking for his text "All power is given to me in heaven and on earth, go therefore teach ye all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you and behold I am with you all days even to the end of the world." Father Madigan (excuse self praise, reader, because there is no one else to tell you) explained that nearly 19 centuries ago those words, addressed by Our Divine Lord to His Apostles a few days after His resurrection gave little promise of success. The Apostles were few, without the favour of rulers, without wealth or great learning, the old pagan empire ruled the then-known world, pampering softness, vice and luxury. How were the Apostles to succeed with a religion which required self-restraint and the practice of virtue? They were to penetrate into every land teaching others what they had been taught, animated and sustained only by a strong faith in Him Who had sent them. Opposition met them at every turn, yet the very beauty of the divine message at first attracted and eventually captivated even its most bitter enemies. Before the end of the first century Christianity had spread to even the most distant parts of the Empire. It was strong living faith in the words of Our Divine Lord that prompted His first followers to communicate to others the gift which they enjoyed. It was strong faith that prompted zealous missionaries to come to these islands about half-a-century ago and bring to pagan races the message of Our Divine Lord. Father Madigan concluded by hoping that the Church in Rabaul would long remain a centre inculcating those Christian lessons of true Christian life.

Rev. Father Bogershausen told the interested natives what a Catholic Church really is – the home of Our Divine Lord. The tower points out that home, the cross teaches us trials are part of our daily life, while inside the church everything tends to raise and fix our minds on Him Who for our sake perpetually resides there.

#### After the Ceremony

After the ceremony the visitors and local residents assembled for refreshments on the verandah of the little presbytery. His Lordship Dr. Vesters presided and nearly ail the white residents were present, including Rev. Barry (Anglican), and Rev. and Mrs. Margetts (Methodists). His Lordship gave a little history of the present church in Rabaul and the difficulties which had all been happily overcome. The Rev Barry (Anglican) in thanking his Lordship for the kindness and hospitality extended to the visitors, gave his impressions of the work of the Catholic mission gained during his first visit to Territory last year. Rev. Barry said he would repeat what he had told his own Anglican Bishop. Dr. Long, of Bathurst. N.S.W. on his return to Australia last year. "there is only one mission in the Mandated Territory and that is the Roman Catholic." Continuing, Rev. Barry said the work of the Catholic mission in uplifting the natives was wonderful and we Anglicans, can and should copy it.

The church, which is constructed of galvanised iron, lined with timber, will accommodate about 500 people. The whole of the work from the preparation of the plan to the driving of the last nail was carried out by the mission Brothers, assisted by half-castes and natives taught by them. The very maximum of result was obtained from the resources available. A church in the islands is never very expensive as it must of necessity contain large open spaces on account of the excessive heat, and can be constructed only of tin and timber because of the frequent earth tremors.

Although the church, or rather the interior, is yet unfinished, and will probably remain so for some time, yet only greatest worries are over, we have space and accommodation from heat and rain for our natives. Two years ago the prospect of a suitable church in Rabaul seemed very remote. The hall in "Chinatown" was a long distance from the convent of the Sisters of Our Lady of the Sacred Heart, and travelling to and from the school every day was very fatiguing and inconvenient. Moreover, we lived continually in fear of a fire, which would deprive us of what we had obtained after so much trouble. We often prayed aid hoped that Our Lord would Inspire someone to help us and our prayers were answered. A generous Australian lady sent £200 and later another kindly benefactor donated $100. Perhaps Rabaul would be without a church to-day except for their kindness. They will ever remain associated with the church, remembered in the Holy Mass and in the prayers of the Sisters, the Chinese children, and the numerous Catholic natives.

**J. G. MADIGAN, M.S.C.,**\
Catholic Mission, Rabaul-Matupit Island

P.S. – Rev. Father Madigan would be grateful to any readers desirous of helping his mission. Gifts – church furnishings educational equipment, etc., may be sent direct or by arrangement with the Rev. Procurator of the Missions, Waltham-street, Coogee.
